Suppose you have some guy in a tough situation—being threatened by a
stranger who’s coming at him with a knife. Our guy pulls out a gun and
shoots once, leaving the assailant on the ground. What does our guy then
do? Does he conclude, “It’s over, he’s incapacitated, I’m safe?” Or does he
keep shooting? What if he waits eleven seconds before attacking the
assailant further? In the final scenario he is charged with premeditated
murder—if he had stopped after the first shot, it would have counted as
self-defense; but he had eleven seconds to think about his options, meaning
that his second round of shots was freely chosen and premeditated.
Let’s consider the guy’s history. He was born with fetal alcohol
syndrome, due to his mother’s drinking. She abandoned him when he was
five, resulting in a string of foster homes featuring physical and sexual
abuse. A drinking problem by thirteen, homeless at fifteen, multiple head
injuries from fights, surviving by panhandling and being a sex worker,
robbed numerous times, stabbed a month earlier by a stranger. An outreach
psychiatric social worker saw him once and noted that he might well have
PTSD. Ya think?
Someone has tried to kill you and you have eleven seconds to make a
life-or-death decision; there’s a well-understood neurobiology as to why
you readily make a terrible decision during this monumental stressor. Now,
instead, it’s our guy with a neurodevelopmental disorder due to fetal
neurotoxicity, repeated childhood trauma, substance abuse, repeated brain
injuries, and a recent stabbing in a similar situation. His history has resulted
in this part of his brain being enlarged, this other part atrophied, this
pathway disconnected. And as a result, there’s, like, zero chance that he’ll
make a prudent, self-regulated decision in those eleven seconds. And you’d
have done the same thing if life had handed you that brain. In this context,
“eleven seconds to premeditate” is a joke.[*]
Despite that, the compatibilist philosophers (and most prosecutors . . .
and judges . . . and juries) don’t think it’s a joke. Sure, life has thrown awful
things at the guy, but he’s had plenty of time in the past to have chosen tonot be the sort of person who would go back and put another bullet in the
assailant’s brain.
A great summary of this viewpoint is given by philosopher Neil Levy
(one that he does not agree with):
Agents are not responsible as soon as they acquire a set of active
dispositions and values; instead, they become responsible by
taking responsibility for their dispositions and values.
Manipulated agents are not immediately responsible for their
actions, because it is only after they have had sufficient time to
reflect upon and experience the effects of their new dispositions
that they qualify as fully responsible agents. The passing of time
(under normal conditions) offers opportunities for deliberation
and reflection, thereby enabling agents to become responsible for
who they are. Agents become responsible for their dispositions
and values in the course of normal life, even when these
dispositions and values are the product of awful constitutive
luck. At some point bad constitutive luck ceases to excuse,
because agents have had time to take responsibility for it.[1]
Sure, maybe no free will just now, but there was relevant free will in the
past.
As implied in Levy’s quote, the process of freely choosing what sort of
person you become, despite whatever bad constitutive luck you’ve had, is
usually framed as a gradual, usually maturational process. In a debate with
Dennett, incompatibilist Gregg Caruso outlined chapter 3’s essence—we
have no control over either the biology or the environment thrown at us.
Dennett’s response was “So what? The point I think you are missing is that
autonomy is something one grows into, and this is indeed a process that is
initially entirely beyond one’s control, but as one matures, and learns, one
begins to be able to control more and more of one’s activities, choices,
thoughts, attitudes, etc.” This is a logical outcome of Dennett’s claim thatbad and good luck average out over time: Come on, get your act together.
You’ve had enough time to take responsibility, to choose to catch up to
everyone else in the marathon.[2]
A similar view comes from the distinguished philosopher Robert Kane,
of the University of Texas: “Free will in my view involves more than
merely free of action. It concerns self-formation. The relevant question for
free will is this: How did you get to be the kind of person you now are?”
Roskies and Shadlen write, “It is plausible to think that agents might be
held morally responsible even for decisions that are not conscious, if those
decisions are due to policy settings which are expressions of the agent [in
other words, acts of free will in the past].”[3]
Not all versions of this idea require gradual acquisition of past-tense free
will. Kane believes that “choose what sort of person you’re going to be”
happens at moments of crisis, at major forks in the road, at moments of
what he calls “Self-Forming Actions” (and he proposes a mechanism by
which this supposedly occurs, which we’ll touch on briefly in chapter 10).
In contrast, psychiatrist Sean Spence, of the University of Sheffield,
believes that those I-had-free-will-back-then moments happen when life is
at its optimal, rather than in crisis.[4]
Whether that free will was-ness was a slow maturational process or
occurred in a flash of crisis or propitiousness, the problem should be
obvious. Was was once now. If the function of a neuron right now is
embedded in its neuronal neighborhood, effects of hormones, brain
development, genes, and so on, you can’t go away for a week and then
show that the function a week prior wasn’t embedded after all.
A variant on this idea is that you may not have free will now about now,
you have free will now about who you are going to be in the future.
Philosopher Peter Tse, who calls this second-order free will, writes how the
brain can “cultivate and create new types of options for itself in the future.”
Not just any brains, however. Tigers, he notes, can’t have this sort of free
will (e.g., choosing that they’re going to become vegans). “Humans, in
contrast, bear a degree of responsibility for having chosen to become the
kind of chooser who they now are.” Combine this with Dennett’sretrospective view and we have something akin to the idea that somewhere
in the future, you will have had free will in the past—I will freely choosed.
[5]
Rather than there being free will, “just not when you’re looking,” there’s
free will, “just not where you’re looking”—you may have shown that free
will isn’t coming from the area of the brain you’re studying; it’s coming
from the area you aren’t. Roskies writes, “It is possible that an
indeterministic event elsewhere in the larger system affects the firing of
[neurons in brain region X], thus making the system as a whole
indeterministic, even though the relation between [neuronal activity in brain
region X] and behavior is deterministic.” And neuroscientist Michael
Gazzaniga moves the free will outside the brain entirely: “Responsibility
exists at a different level of organization: the social level, not in our
determined brains.” There are two big problems with this: First, it isn’t free
will and responsibility just because, on the social level, everyone says it is
—that’s a central point of this book. Second, sociality, social interactions,
organisms being social with each other, are as much an end product of
biology interacting with environment as is the shape of your nose.[6]
Throw down the gauntlet from chapter 3—present me with the neuron,
right here, right now, that caused that behavior, independent of any other
current or historical biological influence. The answer can’t be “Well, we
can’t, but that happened before.” Or “That’s going to occur, but not yet.” Or
“That’s occurring right now but not here—instead, over there; no, not that
there, that other there. . . .” It’s turtles in every place and time; there are no
cracks in the process by which was generates is in which to squeeze free
will.
We move now to probably the most important topic in this half of the
book, a way to erroneously see free will that isn’t there.
